# Dancing Digital/No Boundaries Archive

Dancing Digital is a project lead by Rebecca Salzer (University of Alabama) to create interconnected, online dance resources. _No Boundaries_ is a dance project by Gesel Mason (University of Texas) that consists of a collection of dance solos by African American choreographers that span over 70 years. They hired Whirl-i-Gig to create an online archive for _No Boundaries_ using CollectiveAccess, and integrate the archive with Wikidata. CollectiveAccess is an open source collection management software built by Whirl-i-Gig. My responsibility for the project was to develop a workflow to export/import data between CollectiveAccess and Wikidata.

## Creating dance-related Wikibase

The first step was to figure out how much information was in Wikidata about the _No Boundaries_ choreographers. This was the first time I worked with Wikidata so I had to learn about linked data, Wikidata, and SPARQL. I searched Wikidata for the _No Boundaries_ choreographers, and realized there was very little information about these choreographers. I shared my findings with the team and suggested we contact other dance archives who used CollectiveAccess to see if they would be willing to share their data. My hope was other dance archives would have more information about _No Boundaries_ choreographers. After some discussions, the Brooklyn Academy of Music and Jacob’s Pillow agreed to share their data.

I created Python scripts to export data from _No Boundaries_, Brooklyn Academy of Music, and Jacob’s Pillow using the CollectiveAccess GraphQL API. I worked with Eve Perry, archivist with Whirl-i-Gig, to help normalize the data from the three archives. I then created Python scripts to convert the CollectiveAccess data into subject-predicate-object triples, and import the data into a Wikibase instance named [Dancing Digital Commons (DDC)](https://dancing-digital.wikibase.cloud/wiki/). We imported about 35,000 people and 12,000 works into DDC. DDC is hosted for free on [Wikibase Cloud](https://www.wikibase.cloud).

## Creating a web app for Dancing Digital Commons

While importing the data, I noticed some limitations of the Wikibase UI. For instance, there was no way to view all the works that Gesel Mason choreographed using Wikibase UI. Users could go to a [works page](https://dancing-digital.wikibase.cloud/wiki/Item:Q60084) to see the choreographer, but they could not go to a [choreographer page](https://dancing-digital.wikibase.cloud/wiki/Item:Q1267) to see their works. The only way to see all the works choreographed by a person was to create a [SPARQL query](https://tinyurl.com/2xv7cmzz). Since only a minuscule percentage of people know SPARQL, that would greatly limit the usefulness of DDC.

In order to make DDC data more accessible, I created a demo web app that would allow people to explore Wikibase data without knowing SPARQL. The app shows the related items for a given search term. The app is a static site built using SvelteKit and hosted on Github pages.

The [Search page](https://wykhuh.github.io/wikibase-search/search_graph) allows people to search Wikidata or DDC. The search uses an autocomplete plugin that queries the corresponding Wikibase API for a given search term. The app also displays a hard-coded list of dance-related properties. The app takes the Q ID from the search term, the P ID from the selected properties, and a number for the search depth to create an SPARQL query. The app sends the SPARQL to the selected Wikibase query service, and formats the results. The results are displayed as a network graph using [vis.js](https://visjs.org) and as a table. When people click on a node of the network graph, that triggers another SPARQL query, and the graph and table are updated.

Rebecca and Gesel were able to use the search page to look up various choreographers. They discovered the dance data on Wikidata skewed very white European and male.

I also wanted to create a visualization that compares the information provided by _No Boundaries_, Wikidata, the Brooklyn Academy of Music and Jacob’s Pillow.  The [Compare Sources page](https://wykhuh.github.io/wikibase-search/compare_sources_graph) shows network graphs for the *No Boundaries* choreographers using data from the four datasets. At first I tried using live SPARQL on this page, but the queries took too long load. I ended up saving the results of the SPARQL query as JSON files, and loading the JSON files into the app to produce the network graphs.

These visualizations showed that by combining datasets from four different sources, we were able to get a fuller picture of the contributions of the _No Boundaries_ choreographers.

This demo web app was not part of the original scope of the project. While working on the project, I realized it was important to create user-friendly data exploration tools for Dancing Digital Commons. It was rewarding when Rebecca and Gesel said they found the demos useful, and included the demo app in multiple presentations and grant proposals. Since DDC is hosted on Wikibase cloud and the demo app is hosted on Github pages, people can access the DDC and the demo app without the PIs paying additional hosting fees.
